# The map is not the terrain

With all the new updates this week, a reminder that LLMs are an excellent
illustration of the attempted shifts to redefine what we usually call art (and
knowledge/skill) to be almost entirely separate from its creation process and
from its original meaning, context, environment and situation which lead to its
creation. Being trained on digital reproductions of artworks and some select
metadata, these models are fundamentally constrained to identify patterns for
regenerating simulacra, their usage purely symbolic — a user-driven form of
meme-style cultural sampling, pure semiotic "affiliation by association", a
kitschy clip-art-esque usage of looks, styles and aesthetics, entirely decoupled
and devoid of history, meaning, context, incentives and other factors of (art)
making/learning. A total lack of embodiment. Make this look like that. Baby
portraits in Rembrandt's style, Ghibli used for PFPs or to create Neo-Nazi
propaganda. Who cares?!

## The great homogenizer

Even for me as an artist primarily using non-LLM-based generative techniques for
25+ years, training a model on a corpus of my own works and then having it churn
out new derivations, other than a case study, it would completely counter any of
the creative & systemic investigations I'm after with most of my works. LLMs
turn everything into a sampling and prompting workflow. Replicating a
(non-existent) house style is the very thing I'm least interested in!

## Triteness re-invented

Removed from any original intentions of the consumed works enslaved in their
training corpus, ignorant to the emotional states of their creators, free from
the pains and joys and myriads of micro-decisions of art making, of the social
context and the limitations (physical, material, skill) which led people to
search for expressing their inner thoughts & feelings via artistic means... AI
enthusiasts celebrate this new contextual freedom as creative breakthrough, but
it's always the same underlying sentiment behind: "The final original idea was
that everything had already been done before."

## The Exascale mindset

From the ravenous assembling of training datasets by ferociously crawling &
harvesting absolutely anything which can be possibly found and accessed online,
entirely disregarding author & privacy rights and social/technical contracts of
acceptable use, the energy consumption for model training at a scale competing
with developed nation states, to the abrasive social and political engineering
and the artificial inflation of framing this tech as beneficial and inevitable
to our societies. Most of the news & tech media, always hungry for clickbait,
YouTubers able to create decades' worth of new content — everyone happily
lapping up any press-releases and amplifying the hype. Are there any responsible
adults left where it currently matters most?

This ignorance-by-design isn't about LLMs or their impact on art: The wider
discussion is about how a tiny group of people with access to quasi-unlimited
resources, capital and politicians is attempting to redefine what human culture
is and to treat it (us) like just another large-scale mining operation,
converting millennia of lived human experience, learning & suffering into
monopolized resources for total extraction/monetization, filtered, curated,
controlled and eventually sold back as de facto truth, with original provenance
and meaning annihilated or vastly distorted to fit new purposes and shifting
priorities/politics...

**Don't let the map become the terrain!**

---

Two quotes by Friedrich A. Kittler as related food for thought:

> "What remains of people is what media can store and communicate."

> "Understanding media is an impossibility, because conversely, the prevailing
> communication techniques remote-control all understanding and create all of
> its illusions."
